It is Wednesday, September 8, and we're sitting in Chuck Cargill's study.
We're going to chat first about his student years, and we're testing the microphone, so Chuck, it's your turn to say something.
Well, Haskell, I'm glad you came over.
I've been looking forward to it, and I hope that we can get something that will be useful to someone someday.
Chuck,
Give a brief biographical summary of your growing up years and your experience, where, how, when, before you came to A&M.
Okay.
I was a typical small town, small country town boy, born September the 22nd, 1931, which, of course, as you will know and a lot of other folks will know, was not really the best economic times in our country.
I was a Depression kid.
My father was a wholesale oil distributor in a small country town named Eddie, Texas, E-D-D-Y, located about 20 miles south of Waco, 14 miles north of Temple,
on what is now Interstate 35.
In my days it was US 81.
It was a thriving little country town and had two cotton gins and had a frozen food locker plant of all things.
No one had their own freezers in those days.
We still used chunks of ice in our refrigerators for cooling.
No electric refrigerators in those days.
And my vivid recollection, of course, one of my earliest recollections is of World War II.
I guess our little country town had around 400 people in it.
And during the Depression, my father, as I mentioned, was in the wholesale oil business, distributing business, distributing oil and petroleum products to farmers and ranchers in that area.
Not too many ranchers.
Most of them were cotton farmers or corn farmers or what we call
high gear.
Some people call it Higuera and some people call it red top maize.
We call it high gear.
And it was a feed crop.
But to make a fairly long story short, he flat went broke during the depression in the oil business as many people did in small businesses.
And as it worked out, he was somewhat of a political leader in our little town.
And we had a postmaster in the early days, probably before I was born,
named Carbon Lewis.
Now, Carbon Lewis was the only Republican in Eddie, and he was the postmaster.
Of course, that's back when the SPAIL system was in full swing.
We used to see him, we lived almost across the street from Mr. Lewis, and we'd see him walk into town to go to work,
And mother and dad said, there goes that Republican.
Well, I thought it was a disease of some kind.
And in those days in small towns, you know, it was, they were just one party, basically.
But then my dad met and became friends with Jim Farley, who was the postmaster general at that time, and was appointed as postmaster of our little town, which in the Depression days.
Where did they meet?
There was a gentleman in Waco by the name of Carlton Smith, who was an attorney.
And he was a bosom buddy of a congressman from that area named Bob Pogue.
And Bob Pogue introduced Dad to Jim Farley.
Jim Farley had a phenomenal memory for names.
He could call people by the thousands by their name, and it just astonished everyone.
No one ever knew how he did it, but it was just a gift that he had.
But Dad was somewhat of a...
kind of a political leader in our little town and and through that connection he was appointed as postmaster now this was about this was in probably 30 1932 33 time frame and was postmaster for many many years and shortly before he retired he didn't like working all day every day because he wanted to kind of phase into retirement well the rural male route
was only about a half-a-day job and paid more money than a postmaster's job did.
So he transferred to the rural mail route and delivered mail for, oh, four, five, six years before he actually retired.
Mother, on the other hand, was, of course, a typical housewife in those days.
Most mothers didn't work in those days.
But during the war, she worked at Blue Bonnet Ordnance Plant in McGregor.
making bombs for the war effort.
And I remember she would come in and she would have some yellow powder on her shoes and on parts of her clothing which turned out to be probably TNT or something of that nature.
But I grew up in that little country town and went to a little elementary school in Eddy.
And then when you got into some of the higher grades, we had a consolidated school district called Bruceville Eddy.
Bruceville was a little town not far from Eddy, about two miles, I think, and the school was in the middle.
And so I went to Bruceville Eddy.
And my uncle was class of 38 at Texas A&M.
crippled gentleman by the name of Tom Cole he had polio when he was a child and but at that time you could get in almost like we would call a drill and ceremony student today but he was in the core even though he was badly crippled from polio well he was the predominant influence to for me to go to A&M through the rest of the family you know there was just never any discussion number one I was going to college mother was a school teacher
had two years at Mary Hardin Baylor, which gave you a teaching certificate in those days.
You didn't have to graduate from college.
So through Uncle Tommy's influence and the influence of the rest of the family, number one, there was no question I was going to college, no matter what it took.
And number two, I was going to A&M, period.
I'm sure that there probably would have been some other alternatives, but they were never considered.
And so about my sophomore year in high school, we started checking into what does it take to get into A&M, scholastically.
And I was the valedictorian of my eighth grade class.
You know, back in those days, when you graduate from grammar school, that was a big deal.
And so... How many in that class?
We had 25 at that time.
The time we graduated, I think, was down to about 18.
But... Excuse me.
We found that the only science course that was being offered at Bruceville Eddy at that time was vocational agriculture, which didn't quite hack it as far as entrance requirements for A&M were concerned.
Mother and dad got with whoever the school people were, and I transferred into Waco High School for my junior and senior year, and was able to take chemistry in, oh, I don't know what else.
And that was how far away?
That was 20 miles.
And I rode the Greyhound bus back and forth each way.
The bus station was right across the street from our house, so I'd catch the bus, drive in to
to Waco and sit in the bus station until it was time to go to school, which was just three blocks over, Waco High School, just three blocks over from the bus station.
And then I would go back to the bus station and sit in the bus station until it was time to go home.
And what was that cost?
I think it was 25 cents, maybe 50 cents or something.
And I've forgotten if we could buy a pass or not.
But I learned one of my most valuable skills sitting in the bus station.
Back in those days, they gave bus calls.
And you'd listen to the calls so you'd know which bus to go in.
So I learned the bus calls.
And since I was going south, it was important for me to know the southbound bus calls.
So I learned that when the announcer would come on, he would say, Southbound Greyhound, now leaving for San Antonio by way of...
Lorena, Bruceville, Eddie, Troy, Temple, Belton, Salado, Gerald, Georgetown, Round Rock, Austin, Kyle, San Marcos, New Braunfels, and San Antonio.
So that's one of my most valuable skills is to be able to know the towns in order from Waco to San Antonio.
But I have a lot of fun with that.
But then of course I graduated from A&M and
You said A&M.
I'm sorry.
I graduated from Waco High School in 1949 and came to A&M.
All right, let's see.
Had you visited A&M before coming to be a student?
Never set foot on the campus until Mom and Dad drove me down to register.
All right, they drove you down.
What did you bring physically with you?
that first time as i recall we came down to register and then we went back home to pick up my belongings to report out to brian air force base when we when we finally came down of course texas avenue we didn't have texas avenue at the time we drove down south college and i remember my first first side of a m was the the north view of the systems administration building that you see driving down south college so we registered went back home and
I brought an Army Foot Locker.
It was forest green, you know, the old Army Foot Lockers, the color they were.
Let's see.
Our uniforms were issued to us at that time, so I didn't have to worry about uniforms, and we habitually wore the uniform, day and night.
Of course, I brought my socks and underwear and stuff like that.
I really don't remember bringing any civilian clothes because we couldn't wear them.
Did you even bring a radio?
I don't think I had a radio at that time.
You didn't have a typewriter.
No.
So you brought almost no personal property other than a little bit of clothing.
What kind of razor did you use?
It was an old safety razor.
And that was before even they came out with the Gillette blue blade.
They had the red packages.
And boy, it was a brutal weapon of torture.
and I'd cut myself every time I'd shave, but it was a safety razor.
Back when I first started shaving, my daddy always used a straight razor, and he had a razor strap, and he would hone that razor on the razor strap and use the wet rock and all that kind of stuff.
And I tried that a couple times and almost cut my throat two or three times, so we finally decided that I probably needed a safety razor.
Mom and Dad then bring you down with the footlocker, and where do they deposit you?
We didn't know anything about Bryan Air Force Base at that time, which we commonly referred to as the Annex.
So we went to Bryan Air Force Base, and I'd already been assigned to Barrack 321, which was an Air Force unit, which was the first hint that I had that I was going to be in an Air Force unit.
Oh, one other thing before we leave my registration.
I had no idea what I wanted to major in when I came here.
At that time, we didn't have an undeclared major.
On the day you walked in, you told them what you wanted to do.
So we were standing in line and a friend of mine that grew up in Eddy but had since moved to McGregor was in line in front of me.
He was my bunkmate, Skipper MacMellon.
And we were standing in line and they said, Skipper, what do you want to major in?
He said, I want to take petroleum engineering.
And they came to me and he said, what do you want to major in?
And I said, Skipper, what did you decide?
He said, petroleum engineering.
I said, that sounds good to me.
Sign me up.
Well, I was not an engineer from day one.
flunked everything that you can imagine possibly because of some of my insufficient background but possibly because it was just something i would not adapt to and so anyway that's how i picked my major was because the guy in line in front of me had that major so that seemed reason enough for me excuse me just for a second y'all did that registration
Out at Bryan Field or on the campus?
On the campus, as I recall.
And it was in Cebesa Hall, as I recall.
Yep.
And so then when Mom and Dad brought me down, we pulled up to barracks 321.
Of course, everyone out there was a freshman.
I knew that there was such a thing as hazing, but it was the furthest thing from my mind at that point.
And there were 20 men in an open bay barracks, double bunks.
The skipper was on the top bunk.
I was on the bottom bunk.
And we were the first bunk because we went in the door.
As you go in the door of the barracks, well, then the bunks were crossways and then 10 bunks.
And then you had five bunks, and then in the middle was a big heater.
and then five more bunks, and then out the back door, you went outside to the showers and the latrine and your sinks and all that kind of stuff.
And the shower room and so forth, I would say would probably be 50, 60, 70 feet from the back door.
So if it's raining, you just got wet.
And of course, all of us had uniforms, ponchos,
Helmet liners, which we had other names for the helmet liners, as you know.
Shower clogs because that's what you wore to go to and from so you wouldn't get your feet dirty.
And so mother and daddy, when they pulled up and saw the barracks and dad helped me carry the footlocker in,
They came within an inch of loading me up and taking me back home because they had no idea.
You know, it was like being a basic trainee in the Army at that time.
But we said, no, we'll go ahead and go with it.
Now, this is September of 1940?
1949, September.
I graduated in May of 49 from Waco High School and started here in September of 49.
And it's late September, but still in those years, but it's still hot.
Oh, yes.
of heating and cooling did you have in that building?
We had we had this giant
almost like a pot-bellied stove right in the middle.
The guys in the middle were always complaining about being too hot, and the guys on the end were always complaining about being too cold.
We had no cooling whatsoever.
No fan even?
Not even a fan.
We had opened both double doors in the front, both double doors in the back, and then they had side windows almost over each bunk on each side that you could prop up with some kind of a prop.
So we kept those open all the time.
But we didn't particularly, I don't remember it being unbearable at all.
Now, what was your outfit named and nicknamed?
It was, my freshman outfit was, oh, my goodness.
It was in Barrack 321.
Squadron.
It was Flight 9.
Flight 9.
Did it have a nickname that's tellable in mixed company?
Not my freshman year.
Now, later on, when I got on the campus, my sophomore year, then we had, I remember those pretty well, and we had nicknames there.
And do you remember what courses you had during that year?
ME, trig, mechanical engineering, trig, algebra, chemistry, English.
Nineteen hours.
First semester.
And PE course.
What was a, describe a typical Monday through Friday.
I know there were Saturday morning classes.
But describe a typical day.
What time did you get up and what happened all the way through to bedtime?
We did everything by bugle calls.
And even if you had a clock, which most of us didn't,
You didn't pay any attention to the clock.
You listened to the bugle calls.
And we would have reveille, as I recall, around 6 o'clock.
And we'd fall out in front of our barracks, rain or shine.
Bob Melcher was the commandant of the annex at that time.
And he was tough.
Later became a very close personal friend of mine, but at that time he was God as far as everyone was concerned.
And we had several tactical officers which assisted Bob, Colonel Melcher, in disciplining and making sure everybody did what they were supposed to do.
But we would fall out.
We would hear the bugle call.
We'd fall out.
And then we would, in formation in front of our barracks, would have the flag raising.
And then we would march to the chow hall and eat breakfast.
And you had so many minutes to eat breakfast, then you'd fall back in and, no, wait, you didn't.
We marched to the chow hall, but then we left on our own because some could take more time if they didn't have an early class or what have you.
And all of the buildings, including the classroom buildings, were World War II-type construction, just wooden with tar paper on the outside a lot of times, and just not permanent construction at all.
But they were pretty sound buildings.
Classes began then at 8?
As I recall, yes.
Do you remember class sizes?
I'd say around 20, a little over maybe.
So class sections were reasonably small?
Reasonably small, and all the profs came out from the main campus to teach us.
No one lived on the campus except, well, Bob Melcher was a commandant.
He was in charge of discipline and what have you.
And John Paul Abbott was our dean, and he was in charge of the academic end of the thing.
But he was the dean of the whole county.
He was the dean of the annex.
Oh, of the annex.
Of the annex, yes.
Just of the annex.
But he didn't live out there.
He didn't live there, but he was there all day, every day.
And I remember that on our freshman orientation, they got us all in the theater building, the old theater.
And Dean Ransdell gave us a little pep talk.
And every other word, he was going to give us the poop.
And, of course, his obvious nickname was Poop Ransdell.
Oh.
That's how his nickname, because he, I'm going to give you the poop, the straight poop.
These other guys can tell you things, but you listen to me because I'm going to give you the straight poop.
And so from that time on, he was Poop Ransdell as far as we were concerned.
All right.
You're in class almost every hour?
Pretty well.
We had some breaks.
Of course, we had an hour off for lunch.
Did you fall in in March to lunch?
No, not to lunch.
For breakfast and for the evening meal.
We had formation in March to lunch, and then after the evening meal,
We'd trickle out as we finished our meal and we'd have a couple of hours free time before CQ, call to quarters.
And we had to be in our room with no talking or anything else.
From 7 to 10 was CQ.
Where did you, what kind of facility did you have for study?
We had a desk probably half the size of this one for each student.
Where was it in relation to your bunk?
Let's say the bunk was here and the side wall was here.
Both desks would be pushed up against this wall facing each other, almost like a partner's desk, but they were individual desks.
Then on the other side was our hanging rack for our clothes and our foot lockers underneath that.
And that was it.
We'd line our shoes up under the bed.
Of course, they had to always be shined and what have you.
Okay, that first fall, well, it was your only fall out there.
How long was it before you and your buddies went anywhere?
The first home football game.
Lee will get that.
And it might ring one more time before she picks it.
No, she got it the first ring.
The first home football game was the first time we were off the campus, and that was our first introduction to upperclassmen, and it was horrible.
Those sophomores had been just waiting for a chance because they had been through it the year before, and they had not even seen a freshman up to that first home football game.
And we, of course, had been taught how to whip out and meet people and introduce ourselves and the proper way to address upperclassmen and what have you.
But we'd never really been hazed up until that point.
And no physical hazing there.
It was strictly mental.
But boy, it was, you know, I'd always led a sheltered life.
Everybody had been nice to me.
I'd been raised in the First Baptist Church.
And, you know, everybody was just like country folks are, just real friendly, outgoing.
And no one had ever raised their voice to me in my life.
So it was a rude awakening.
Can you give some samples?
Oh, for example, when you'd whip out, you'd stick out your hand, you'd say, Fist Jones is my name, sir.
And he'd say, if the sophomores would say, Smith is my name, juniors would say, my name is Smith.
Seniors would just say, Smith.
And a sophomore could not say, my name is.
He had to give his name first, you know, just a little something like that.
And then you'd say, well, a lot of times they'd say, where are you from and what course are you taking?
Well, you'd get in the habit of saying, I'm from Eddie taking Petroleum Engineering.
And he'd say, where are you from?
And I'd say, I'm from Eddie taking Petroleum Engineering.
I didn't ask you what course you were taking.
I'd just ask you where you were from, you know.
And, of course, it would be much more severe than that.
But, you know, those kinds of things.
It would just get right up in your face and...
But it was primarily verbal.
At that point, my freshman year.
Now my sophomore year was still a different story.
So you come to the football game, did somebody come out there and explain to you all about
standing up and practice, did you all have a little... We had freshman orientation and they went through all that and you know we were looking forward to seeing the game obviously we didn't see a play, not a play did we see and of course obviously stood up all the time just the way we still do and that wasn't a problem but as I recall they bused us in because nobody had a car in those days not even a bicycle and so
Did you then go back out to the base soon after the game was over?
Yes.
And that was one of our most interesting nights, the night of our first home football game.
All of us had been traumatized by the hazing.
And so about 11 o'clock that night in the barracks next to us, all hell broke loose, screaming and hollering and hooping and glass breaking and furniture breaking.
And we thought, man, the upperclassmen are over there tearing those kids up and they're going to be over here next.
And we were scared to death.
Next morning, we found out that there was not an upperclassman in sight.
A bunch of those freshmen had gotten drunk and were raising cane themselves.
So we thought, you know, it can't get any worse than that.
Where'd they get the alcohol?
Have no idea, but they got it somewhere.
All right, now, across the river in Burleson County was wet, wasn't it?
River Bridge, yes.
Jones Road Bridge.
And, but of course, I don't know.
At that point.
At that point, we, no one had a car to get over there, so someone had to bring it to them, or they had some Confederates, maybe some hometown buddies.
That was another phenomenon, too.
If you had a hometown buddy, and I claim Waco is my hometown because I was the only guy from Eddie, so I didn't have any hometown Eddie buddies, so I could legitimately tell everybody I was from Waco since I graduated from Waco High School.
Well, you could drop handles with hometown buddies.
That means you didn't have to observe the protocol and the etiquette of the class distinction there.
So I had a lot of buddies from Waco that kind of tucked me under their wing and helped me along a little bit.
And one of them was Guy King.
He was a football player here, as I recall, and big football player for Waco High School when he was there.
And I've forgotten the names, but there were several.
And so that was a little benefit that I was able to enjoy.
Do you remember the first Sunday?
Did y'all have a chapel out there?
We had chapel, and all of us went.
As I recall, they had a Protestant service and a Catholic service, all in the same building but at different times.
Do you remember who conducted them?
No, I really don't.
I was wondering, was it a local minister?
No, I think it was someone that worked with the students as almost a counselor, but he was also a minister.
And it was kind of a non-denominational type deal.
We didn't have denominational services.
They were non-denominational.
But I don't remember who it was.
All right, how long was it before you all began to talk, somebody began to talk about leaving?
Oh, almost after the first football game.
I mean, there were, as I mentioned, there were 20 of us that were in the barracks.
And as I recall, we lost probably a third of them the first year, at least the third the first year.
I think one or two of them left after the first football game.
They're not going to put up with that.
I don't remember who they were, but I remember a lot of the names of the guys that were in the barracks.
Now, and as a group, these youngsters were basically, well, describe them basically.
Background and ethnicity?
We had, it was a Duke's mixture.
There were a lot of guys from Houston.
I remember there was one guy named Mack Neely and another guy from Chapman that were both from Houston and they were big buddies and kind of hell raising types but real likable guys.
There were a lot of farm community boys like myself.
I remember we had one guy Octavio Flores who was the son of the governor of
I believe, in Mexico.
He died not too long ago.
I saw him in the Texas Aggie, but he went on to graduate.
He was the only international student that I can remember.
A lot of them from the Port Arthur, Beaumont, Golden Triangle area.
Just all over.
Rich and poor?
Definitely.
Most of us in our barracks were either from poor families or certainly no more than moderately well-off families.
And they're all right out of high school.
Right out of high school.
No older than average.
No.
Now, they had a separate living area for those that were returning from the military, the veterans and what have you.
Fish, who were World War II veterans, are out there also?
They were, but they didn't have to go through all the guff that the rest of us did.
There was no hazing and they were kind of, you know, the upperclassmen left them alone, so to speak.
They figured they'd been through enough already.
Now, what organizations were there out there, non-academic?
I don't remember any.
Those don't have a fish band?
Oh, yeah, I'm sorry.
We surely did.
Had a fish band.
We had our own fish yell leaders.
Paco Coronado was one of our yell leaders.
Dukie Childs, who just, every time we have a class reunion, we always, Dukie leads us in some old yells.
Fish drill team.
And let's see.
Of course, we were big on intramural sports because that's all we had to do.
There was no television, no movies.
Well, I'll take it back.
We did have a movie theater, and I think we could go to the movies on Wednesday night or something, maybe on Saturday night.
These intramurals, what sports during the whole nine months, what sports were important?
Touch football.
We had some, did we have tennis courts?
I don't remember if we had tennis courts or not.
We played softball.
Baseball and football were the two main ones that I recall.
Not basketball?
Yeah, we did play, had a gym, played some basketball.
One of the favorite sports was to wait until after a big rain.
And then we'd play football in the mud.
And, of course, we'd get muddy from head to foot.
That was the idea of the thing.
And there were no social events out there?
Not that I recall.
Nobody, never had a date to go to the movie or anything like that?
No.
And you all got off that campus, the annexed campus, about how often?
I'd say after the football season started, you had to get a pass just the way you do in the military.
I think they gave us one weekend a month or something of that nature.
My mind's hazy on how often we were able to get off.
We'd go home, of course, on the holidays like Thanksgiving and Christmas, and I guess we had spring break.
I don't remember if we did or not.
Do you remember during that year going into Bryan on a Saturday night?
Yes.
Yes, we could go in to see movies, go to Bryan and the old Schumann Theaters downtown.
What were the apparent glamorous places for Aggie Fish to go?
Well, they had a drug store on the corner of Maine, and I guess it was 26th Street, maybe, across from where the palace is.
And I've forgotten the name.
I want to say Kennedy's Pharmacy, but that may be at Northgate.
I'm not sure which.
But the drug store was a good place to get a hamburger and a milkshake.
But this really was not a whole lot to do.
I'll never forget.
The first time we went to town, you know, the freshmen wore the winter uniforms were the olive green pants and the World War II blouse.
The sophomores wore the same thing but with different emphasis on brass and the different braid on their cap so that you could tell them they were sophomores instead of freshmen.
But the juniors were the first class that were able to wear pinks with their blouses.
Well, we saw all these juniors coming that we thought were juniors.
Well, it works out they were from Allen Academy.
Allen Academy's uniform, all those kids wore pinks in the top.
And from a distance, you couldn't tell them apart, especially if they were pretty big kids, from a junior at A&M.
So I remember we'd go a half a block to avoid seeing those guys because we knew we were going to get hazed if they got close to us.
And as it worked out, they were Allen Academy kids, or Allen rats as we called them in those days.
What kinds of activities
activities or events do you remember that any youngsters from the annex got involved in that might have been marginal or easily defined as prohibited?
I guess that first night of the guys getting drunk was the only time I ever saw any evidence of alcohol, the whole nine months.
Really?
The whole nine months.
What about alcohol in Bryan somewhere?
No, I don't remember ever seeing anyone have an even